Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson.
Michael Whalen. He has to be recognized as the hottest artist going in the science fiction and fantasy field.
In the fall of 1983, he won the latest of several hugos, he's garnered his best artist doing science fiction and fantasy work.
We spoke with Whalen recently and asked him when his interest in science fiction and fantasy art began.
I think it developed when I was born. My father's always worked in the space industry, or in the missiles and space industry.
So I had that input around me. He had always been reading science fiction since I was young.
So I had the magazines around to look at and some of my earliest recollections are of looking at the covers of old amazing stories, magazines, or paperback books.
In fact, some of them influenced me to a great deal. Before I could even read or write, I remember looking at some of those covers for hours and absorbing the visual feeling of the paintings.
There were a few that were especially captivating for me. I remembered them to this day exactly what the paintings looked like.
I could describe to you the compositions and some of the colors of the paintings.
It's a funny thing at the last World Science Fiction Convention, I was walking down by one of the dealer's tables in the dealer's room.
I just started going through some of the paperback books and I saw one of the covers that I remembered from when I was three years old or whatever.
It was interesting to me because I hadn't been able, in retrospect, to pinpoint the exact time when I started really being fascinated by science fiction imagery.
This book had been published in 1952 or 1953, so being born in 1950 pretty much establishes the beginning of that at around three years old or so.
The fact that it meant so much to me that I remembered that exact cover until my present age, I said something about how it was just a part of me that that kind of imagery was important to me.
Later when I began to read, I became an avid reader of all types of literature, but especially science fiction and fantasy.
I had an interest in arts, so the two combined. It seemed natural to me to read and try to draw what I read.
I would come home sometimes from science fiction movies or movies that I enjoyed and try to illustrate scenes that I'd seen in the movie from memory.
That carried on pretty much into my college years.
In college, Wayland had no plans on becoming an artist. He was, in fact, a pre-med student.
In college, I had been laboring under the assumption that I had to have a real type of profession.
This is largely due to the input from my parents, but I felt that I had to be something professional, like a lawyer, something respectable, which being an artist isn't.
I was diverted during my college years into wanting to become a doctor, which is still a major interest in mine.
Anatomy, physiology, and the sciences in general were always important to me.
About three quarters of the way through my college education, I decided to abandon my pre-med training and go full scale.
Well, actually, it wasn't until my last year of college that I decided full tilt to go into illustrating or painting.
I graduated with a degree in painting. If I had taken one more course, I would have had a degree in biology with an emphasis on anatomy and physiology, human anatomy and physiology.
Wayland pays special attention to the human form in his art. There's a reason for that.
One of the jobs I had when I was putting myself through colleges working in the anatomy and physiology labs at the university I went to, preparing the cadavers for the classes.
And during that time, I managed to get some work in doing medical illustrations.
All this combined to really give me a good fundamental education in the way the body is made up.
More next time with Michael Wayland.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The show is now available on the website.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your posts.
This is David Carson.
And Daryl Lane.
Hugo Award winning artist Michael Wayland has always been a reader of science fiction and fantasy. His love of the field inspires his work.
Among other things, Wayland paints covers for science fiction and fantasy books.
He's the most successful artist in his field right now, and if you're reading the science fiction at all, you've seen and admired one of his covers.
How does Wayland come up with an idea for a book cover? Say for his well-known painting on Anne McCaffer.
That's going back way. That's back in 77 or 78 when I did that.
I read the book one time, just as a reader, and I go through it again the second time as an illustrator, making notes in margins about details of the way people and objects and things look, making sure that I try to catch all the details.
So I don't make someone who's blonde, black-haired, or whatever, you know, because I like to be really true to the story as much as possible, especially if I'm taking a narrative approach to doing an illustration.
After going through it that second time, I'll sit down and start to develop thumbnail sketches, which are just small drawings on scrap paper, actually, and try to find an idea of what I would like to illustrate from that book.
There's usually something in any book, no matter how bad or good, that will make a good painting. It's a matter of digging through it and finding what I can do and what will motivate you to do a really good job.
So I go through it and try to collate all my different ideas and put it together into a painting.
That is a mysterious part that I can't really describe to you how that happens. I guess that's what makes me what I am, is that process there of distilling what I've read into something that's a visual image that captures what's in the book.
That process takes a few days to do, and sometimes I get an instant image.
The cover I just did for Robert A. Highline's book Friday, I had an instantaneous concept of what that cover was going to look like.
As soon as I finished reading the book the first time, I had a perfectly clear idea of what Friday looked like, and I knew that the cover to this book had to be a portrait of this character because the character had such personality.
The book was written around her personality, I think.
If he ever gets any feedback from authors, whose book covers he's done?
Yes, lots of time. In fact, with Friday I got a phone call from Robert A. Highline.
A couple of months after I turned into the painting to Valentine Del Ray, they sent him a cover proof, which is a first run color tryout of what the cover is going to look like.
He called me up to tell me it was a little flattery, I guess. He told me it was the best cover he ever had on a book of his, which is really quite a statement for someone who's been in the field as long as he has.
To have an author tell me that I've captured a particular character or scene, exactly the way they had it in mind is probably, for me, the highest praise that an illustrator can get.
That really had me floating up by the ceiling for a couple of weeks to think that he would bother to call me to tell me that.
Sometimes before I do a painting I'll correspond with an author or talk to him or her on the phone to establish certain details.
With the White Dragon, for example, I talked to Anne McCaffrey at length about the actual details of the dragons, as she saw the dragons in her book, whether they had forked tails or tails that ended in a point or whatever, or a barb or whatever, and what their skin was like and what the texture was, so that I could try to capture her image of what they looked like.
It's kind of silly for someone who's an illustrator to try to make all that up when you can contact the author and get the details, if they're not in the book, straight from the person who found them out.
We'll continue our conversation with Michael Whelan on our next show.
The Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
Multiple award-winning science fiction artist Michael Whelan has done the cover art on many of the blockbusters in the science fiction and fantasy field recently.
The cover painting for Anne McCaffrey's The White Dragon was probably his first well-known cover.
Since then, he's done the art for Arthur Clark's 2010 Odyssey II, Robert Heinlein's Friday, and Isaac Asimov's Foundation's Edge.
We asked Whelan if he has a favorite type of subject for his paintings.
I think one thing that you can say about my work is that I try to cover all the fields.
And that's because it's all, I don't have any particular favorite.
I think I could say I have a favorite assignment each year.
There's one assignment I get every year that's the one I look forward to.
It's a regular thing now with the dog books, and that's the year's best horror story that's covered.
It's a collection of horror stories, supposedly the year's best.
And I have completely free reign.
I often do with book covers, but especially with this one.
And that's enjoyable to me.
I like doing a good horror painting once in a while.
I'm not a person who's interested in all the blood and guts.
I equate that more with revulsion than I do with horror.
They're different.
But that is a lot of fun, and I've enjoyed doing that cover every year.
That painting, I should say.
I've come up with a few pretty scary ideas that never let me paint.
Someday I'll do this for myself.
That's only one aspect.
I like, of course, the other aspects of science fiction and fantasy.
I like the exploration of space, what they call hardware paintings with spaceships and all that.
That's a lot of fun.
I like to just kind of keep my fingers in all of it.
I can't really say I have a, especially having a favorite field.
Horror is one of them, and that particular job is probably my favorite assignment out of the year.
But I can't say it's doing horror.
It's something I like to do overdoing other things.
We've all seen the God in attention getting covers in science fiction and fantasy books.
Maybe you've even been influenced to buy a book because of its cover.
We asked Waylon if a cover can sell a science fiction book.
I honestly don't know.
I really don't know.
I've got, sometimes I think it makes a big difference, other times I don't.
The fact that my career has gone where it has, and that sometimes I think it makes a big difference.
The fact that I'm getting paid what I do and everything to do these covers,
and that the publishers seem to think that my work sells books over just the title and the name of the author,
makes me think sometimes that our work has a lot to do with that.
There are other times when you'll see a bestseller that has an absolutely wretched cover,
or has nothing but type on it that's selling quite well,
then you think the cover art has absolutely nothing to do with it.
So it's really hard to say.
It's a balance, I think, between how famous the author is, how much publicity the book has gotten,
and the expectations that people have had before the books have been published.
A book like Foundations Edge, the foundation series by Isaac Jasmavich has a large readership.
They've been waiting for this book and it's come out.
They could have put a black cover with just the title Foundations Edge on it, and that thing would have sold off the shelf.
But just to be sure, they've hired me to do the paperback cover for that book.
But books that have very large publications have large budgets,
and so they can afford to have a good cover for that.
And I think that's why it's true, as the founder of Dell, he's asking the Dell Accord,
don't remember his first name, anyway, he said,
what you do is when you have a good painter, good cover artist,
use them for your best book or your worst book.
As the top cover artist working today, Waylon gets a lot of both types.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Daryl Lane.
Richard Curtis is a New York literary agent who represents a number of today's most popular science fiction authors.
He also writes a column for Locust Magazine, the best known publication in the science fiction and fantasy field.
The column is called Agents Corner, and it's full of advice for any kind of author, not just science fiction and fantasy writers.
We asked Curtis about the origin of his column.
Well, about two and a half years ago, I was invited to address a group of authors,
American Society of Journalists and Authors, and I chose to talk to them about certain contractual clauses that I thought might be pitfalls for most professional authors.
In the questioning that followed, I found an appalling ignorance on the part of authors on the subject of contracts.
And many of these people are highly respected professional journalists and book authors,
and yet it was clear to me that they didn't know anything, or very much I should say, about how to read a contract, how to negotiate one,
and how to alter a clause to their own benefit.
And so I decided to write a column for the many other writers who probably are in the same position.
And I asked Charles Brown, the editor of Locust, a publisher of Locust, I guess, whether he'd be interested in publishing it.
And he was quite agreeable. And thereafter, a number of magazines, newsletters published by other writers groups such as Western Writers of America,
romance writers of America, and mystery writers of America took on the column because they felt their authors were in the same position.
We asked Curtis if he would mind telling us some of the science fiction authors he represents.
Well, no, I don't mind at all. It's, I think, a fairly common knowledge in the science fiction community.
We represent Harlan Ellison, Gregory Benford, Greg Behr, Elizabeth Lynn, Marta Randall, Barry Longhear, Warren Norwood, Jessica Sammonson.
And I'd say three or four more.
Since Curtis represents all sorts of authors who write for the paperbacks, we asked him about the popularity of genre literature,
such as Westerns, romances, mysteries, science fiction, and so forth.
The publishers, for instance, create the market for these books and thereby, in a sense, determine readers' taste.
It's hard to say. Sometimes the publishers create the taste, and sometimes the market, the consumer, creates the demand.
And sometimes it's the agent. For instance, I find myself very often in speaking to publishers, I find myself in a double role.
I keep my ears open and try to listen to what a publisher tells me about what he's able to sell and what he's not able to sell.
And so I have a kind of passive role in that I pass along to authors what the publishers tell me the market is doing.
However, if I begin to notice a trend, I then try to help create a market by turning to other publishers and saying,
listen, I've had lunch the last couple of months with four publishers, and they all tell me that hard science fiction is not as active as fantasy and source and sorcery.
And so maybe you'd be interested in some source and sorcery.
So an agent is in the position of shaping the market once it begins to detect the trend.
More next time with Agent Richard Curtis.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Carson.
Richard Curtis has been a literary agent for over 25 years, and he represents some of today's most popular science fiction and fantasy authors.
He also writes a column in the Science Fiction magazine, Locus, which contains all sorts of practical advice for writers of any genre.
Many science fiction fans, of course, have often wondered if they could make it as writers.
We asked Curtis if he had any advice for aspiring science fiction or fantasy authors.
Always begin with the magazines.
You're absolutely right about science fiction fans being more fanatic, but they are also fortunate in having a place with a writer.
They can begin in the shorter media where most writers in other genres don't have the chance.
I mean, there are very few places where a romance writer can contieve.
You know, you can't write romance short stories unless you try to write for some of the Slicker Women's magazines.
And they're, of course, very demanding in what they accept.
There used to be Western magazines, many, many of them, but those, almost all of them, are gone now.
Mystery magazines were still a couple of them, but it's not like what it used to be when I got into the business about 25 years ago.
So one of the few remaining genres that invites new talent and cultivates it is science fiction,
where you have very active magazine market and anthology market for original stories.
Besides this advice, Curtis says there's one particular aspect of science fiction that can also help a beginning writer.
You also have conventions, of course Western writers, romance writers, mystery writers also have their conventions,
but certainly science fiction writers can out-convention anybody by ratio of 10 to 1.
So there's a lot of interplay where authors are always talking to one another,
meeting editors, meeting professional writers, and there's a much tighter unity than there is in any other genre.
So I would definitely advise any aspiring science fiction writer to start writing in the magazine.
In fact, even some of my well-known clients, I still tell them to continue writing for science fiction magazines,
even though they may get peanuts for their work compared to what they can get writing books,
because the exposure among both science fiction editors and science fiction fans is terribly important.
Regular readers of science fiction and fantasy have certainly noticed a great number of trilogies in the past few years.
Right, it almost seems as if authors plan on writing a three-book series when they begin a novel.
We ask Curtis if he is an agent, like to receive trilogies from his authors.
The beauty of a trilogy, of course, is from an agency point, is in the kind of package deal that one can make
where you not only sign an autograph for a book, but you can sign him up for a sequel and a sequel after that.
And the author knows where he's going to be two years from now.
The publisher knows what he can expect over a couple of years, and unless the author one day runs out of steam
or gets bored with the characters that he developed in book one or two,
you can see a cumulative effect in the sales of a trilogy where publication of book two makes people scurry for book one,
and publication of book three causes the publisher to reissue books one and two,
and then they put them in a box set and they're reviewed as a whole.
It's a very nice way of publishing books, but not everybody has a sequel in them.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.